
San Jose, CA
City of San José City Policy Manual
Open Data Policy (DRAFT) Section X.X.X
The City of San Jose is committed to freely sharing as much information as possible. We
recognize that information is a valuable resource and a strategic asset to the public. Making
information accessible, discoverable, and usable by the public can help fuel entrepreneurship,
innovation, scientific discovery, and a more efficient government.
In 2016 the City will launch an open data portal and adopt an open data policy. Over the next
few months, the City will gather community input through a digital survey and a series of public
events.
We appreciate your interest in the City of San Jose’s Draft Open Data Policy. This is a draft
and is subject to further revision. As part of our commitment to transparency and community
engagement, we welcome your interest and feedback on how we can make this policy more
effective. Please send comments or a draft of this document with your suggested revisions to
opendata@sanjoseca.gov.
If you have questions, please contact Kevin Miller at kevin.miller@sanjoseca.gov.
City of San José City Policy Manual
Open Data Policy (DRAFT) Section X.X.X
PURPOSE
The purpose of this policy is to affirm the City of San José’s commitment to open, honest, and
effective government. The City strives to consistently meet the community’s expectations for
excellent services in a positive and timely manner, and in full view of the public. Open Data is
an important component of this commitment; through making its data publicly available and
easily accessible, the City of San José will empower the community to engage with government
on a new level and stimulate new ideas, new services, and new economic opportunities. In
addition, Open Data will provide a new platform to increase the sharing of information among
City Departments, improving the City’s ability to deliver services to the community efficiently and
effectively.
DEFINITIONS
Common Data Standards: Any set of data collection standards agreed upon by multiple
stakeholders designed to promote interoperability and facilitate the efficient exchange and use
of information collected in different systems.
Data: Structured information.
Dataset: A collection of data presented in tabular or non-tabular form.
Data Source: A system, database, or other information source that contains and reports raw
data.
Information Lifecycle: The stages through which information passes, typically characterized as
creation or collection, processing, dissemination, use, storage, and disposition.
Interoperability: The ability of different information technology systems, software and data
applications to communicate and exchange data, and use the information that has been
exchanged.
Metadata: Data that describes a dataset. Metadata summarizes basic information about a
dataset, such as the date range covered by a dataset, a description of the dataset, the manager
or steward of the dataset, etc.
Open Data: The method by which data is made open and freely available to the public to be
republished, manipulated, or used in any other way without restriction.
Open Data Portal: The internet site established and maintained on behalf of the City, located
at http://data.sanjoseca.gov
POLICY
It is the policy of the City of San José that the data it collects and generates will, to the extent
practicable, be open by default. City Departments, with support from the Information
Technology Department, will publish all appropriate datasets and associated metadata
controlled by that department on the City’s Open Data Portal, except where the posting of such
data would violate privacy or security concerns. Every reasonable effort shall be made to
City of San José City Policy Manual
Open Data Policy (DRAFT) Section X.X.X
frequently update datasets on the Open Data Portal to the extent that the Department regularly
maintains or updates such data.
New information systems shall, to the extent practicable, have the ability to report data in a
manner consistent with the open data standards outlined in the Open Data Standards section
below. When updating existing legacy systems, departments shall make a reasonable effort to
ensure that such systems have the ability to report data in a way that meets the open data
standards as outlined in the Open Data Standards section below.
On a case by case basis, to facilitate the acquisition of systems that meet open data standards,
additional consideration for meeting the Open Data Standards section below will be
incorporated into an RFP’s evaluation criteria for scoring RFP responses. The Chief Information
Officer shall have the authority to determine whether the systems included in RFPs meet such
standards or may be excluded due to security or privacy reasons.
Scope
This Policy applies to all City Departments falling under the authority of the City Manager and is
applicable to any data created or used by such departments.
GOVERNANCE AND OVERSIGHT
Roles and Responsibilities
To facilitate the implementation of this Policy, the City Manager directs the following roles to
take on the responsibilities identified below:
Information
Technology
Department
The City of San José Open Data Portal will be administered by the
Information Technology Department (ITD). ITD will work with
Departments to facilitate upgrades to legacy systems and onboarding of
new systems meeting open data standards as defined in the Open Data
Standards section below. ITD, in partnership with the roles identified
below, will produce a report on the state of the Open Data Initiative no
less than annually.
Open Data
Architect
The Open Data Architect (ODA), located in the IT Department, will act
as the frontline manager for the Open Data Portal. This position will
work with Departments to identify data sources that impact the San José
community and connect those sources of information with the City’s
Open Data Portal. The ODA will oversee system integration between
Departmental data sources and the Open Data Portal to facilitate
availability of current and accurate published data.
Data Analytics
Team
The Data Analytics Team (DAT) will provide general support for data related
initiatives in the City of San José. DAT will oversee the Data
Inventory Initiative and assist in identifying datasets for publication. DAT
will take on other duties related to Open Data as assigned by the City
Manager. 
City of San José City Policy Manual
Open Data Policy (DRAFT) Section X.X.X
Data
Coordinators
Each department shall designate one staff member to serve as Data
Coordinator. Data Coordinators are responsible for liaising with the
Data Analytics Team, IT and the Open Data Architect on all matters
related to Open Data and data analytics, in general. In addition the open
data coordinators will have the responsibility for ensuring the timely
release and refresh of data
The City Manager may assign additional roles and responsibilities related to the implementation
of this Policy as needed.
Open Data Portal
A single web portal shall be maintained by or on behalf of the City of San José, administered by
ITD. Data made accessible on the Open Data Portal shall meet open data standards as defined
in the Open Data Standards section below.
OPEN DATA STANDARDS
To promote government efficiency and the social good that can be gained from opening
government data to the public, the default state of new and modernized City of San José
information resources shall be open and machine readable. City information shall be managed
as an asset throughout its lifecycle to promote interoperability and openness, and, wherever
possible and legally permissible, to ensure that data is released to the public in ways that make
the data easy to find, accessible, and usable by the public. The City remains committed to
safeguarding individual privacy, confidentiality, and security and will not post information that is
legally protected or poses a threat to security, safety or the general well-being of the community.
When designing new information collection and creation efforts, City of San José Departments
should support downstream interoperability between information systems and dissemination of
information to the public, as appropriate, without the need for retrofitting. This includes
consideration and consultation of key target audiences for the information when determining
format, frequency of update, and other information management decisions. Specifically,
Departments must incorporate the following requirements into future information collection and
creation efforts:
Use machine-readable and open formats: To the extent practicable, Departments must use
machine-readable and open formats for information as it is collected or created. While
information should be collected electronically by default, machine-readable and open formats
must also be used in conjunction with electronic and telephone or paper-based information
collection efforts. Departments should prioritize the use of open formats that are nonproprietary,
publicly available, and that place no restrictions upon their use.
Use data standards: To the extent practicable, and where common data standards are
defined, Departments shall use such common data standards in the collection and creation of
information to promote data interoperability and openness. 
City of San José City Policy Manual
Open Data Policy (DRAFT) Section X.X.X
Ensure information stewardship through the use of open licenses: To the extent
practicable, Departments shall apply open licenses to information as it is collected or created to
ensure that as data is made public, there are no restrictions on copying, publishing, distributing,
transmitting, adapting, or otherwise using the information for non-commercial or commercial
purposes. When information is acquired or accessed by a Department through performance of
a contract, appropriate existing clauses shall be used to meet these objectives while recognizing
that contractors may have proprietary interests in such information, and that protection of such
information may be necessary to encourage qualified contractors to participate in and apply
innovative concepts to government programs.
Ensure frequent updates: To the extent practicable, Departments shall work with the
Information Technology Department to provide frequent updates to data hosted on the Open
Data Portal to the extent the Department regularly maintains or updates such data.
TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS
New information systems shall, to the extent practicable, have the ability to report data in a
manner consistent with the open data standards outlined in the Open Data Standards section
above. When updating existing legacy systems, departments shall make a reasonable effort to
ensure that such systems have the ability to report data in a way that meets the open data
standards as outlined in Open Data Standards above.
PROCUREMENT INCENTIVES FOR THE ACQUISITION OF NEW SYSTEMS
To facilitate the acquisition of systems that meet open data standards, the City of San José will
award five additional points in the Request for Proposals (RFP) process to proposals that
include systems that meet the above Information Systems Standards. The Chief Information
Officer has the authority to determine whether the systems included in such proposals meet
such standards as defined in the Technology Standards section above.
LEGAL TERMS FOR PUBLIC USE OF OPEN DATA
Public data made available on the City of San José data portal shall be provided as a public
service, on an “as is” basis, and for informational purposes only. Although the City will strive to
ensure that such public data is accurate, the City shall make no warranty, representation or
guaranty of any type as to the content, accuracy, timeliness, completeness or fitness for any
particular purpose or use of any public data provided on such portal; nor shall any such
warranty be implied, including, without limitation, the implied warranties of merchantability and
fitness for a particular purpose. The City shall assume no liability for (i) any errors, omissions or
inaccuracies in the public data provided on the City of San José data portal regardless of how
caused; or (ii) any decision made or action taken or not taken by anyone using or relying upon
such public data; or (iii) any virus or other damage to any computer that might occur during or
as a result of accessing such portal or the public data provided therein; or (iv) any other act
identified in any disclaimer of liability or indemnification provision or any other provision set forth
in the Terms of Use required under subsection (b) of this section.
City of San José City Policy Manual
Open Data Policy (DRAFT) Section X.X.X
The City of San José data portal and all public data contained on such portal shall be subject to
Terms of Use developed by the City. Such Terms of Use shall be posted by the City in a
conspicuous place on the open data portal.
The City shall reserve the right to discontinue availability of content on the City of San Jose data
portal at any time and for any reason. If a data set is made accessible by a city agency on the
City of San Jose data portal and such city agency is notified or otherwise learns that any data
set or portion thereof posted on the data portal is factually inaccurate or misleading or is
protected data, the city agency shall, as appropriate, promptly correct or remove, or cause to be
corrected or removed, such data from the data portal and shall so inform the chairperson of the
open data advisory group.
IMPLEMENTATION
To facilitate the strategic implementation of this policy, Departments shall participate in all
associated processes including, but not limited to, the processes identified below. The Chief
Information Officer, Open Data Architect, and Data Analytics Team may identify additional
processes as necessary to facilitate full implementation of this policy and the Open Data
Initiative, in general.
Data Inventory Process
All City Departments shall participate in the City-wide data inventory process. Departmental
Data Coordinators shall facilitate the inventory process within their respective departments at
the direction of the Data Analytics Team and Chief Information Officer.
Prioritization Process
The Information Technology Department will work with the City Manager and Department staff
to prioritize datasets for publishing on the Open Data Portal. Datasets shall be assessed
against a set of criteria to be defined by the City Manager.
The relative priority of datasets shall be the primary factor in determining the order by which
datasets are published on the Open Data Portal.
Legal Review
The City of San José shall comply with all federal, state, and local privacy laws and regulations.
Personally identifiable information shall be excluded from the open data portal to maintain
privacy and security. The City Manager’s Office, Information Technology Department, and
Departmental Data Coordinators shall work with the City Attorney’s Office as necessary to
maintain privacy and ensure personally identifiable information is protected. While the City
makes every attempt to ensure the accuracy and integrity of the data provided on the open data
portal is of high quality, the City does not guarantee the accuracy of any data posted on the
open data portal and shall not be held accountable for the accuracy of any information
contained within it. 
City of San José City Policy Manual
Open Data Policy (DRAFT) Section X.X.X
Data Integration
The Information Technology Department shall work with Data Coordinators to determine the
best process for transferring data to the open data portal. Depending on system specifications
and limitations, this may include:
 Flat file extracts
 Development of a web service
 Updates from a webpage
 Other means as appropriate
The Information Technology Department will work with departments to select the most
appropriate method for transferring data to the open data portal.
Data Release and Validation
Data Coordinators shall be responsible for the timely release of their data in accordance with
the prioritization process as defined above. The validation and accuracy of the data hosted on
the portal shall be the responsibility of the Data Coordinator in the department from which the
data originates. Data Coordinators shall ensure that data hosted on the open data portal
originating from their departments complies with all provisions of the Open Data Policy. The City does not guarantee the accuracy of any data posted on the open data portal and shall not be
held accountable for the accuracy of any information contained within it.
Timely Update of Data
Data Coordinators shall be responsible for ensuring that data is updated on a routine basis,
where applicable, and ensure the content on the open data portal is current and consistent with
the source data set.
