
Victorville, CA 
RESOLUTION NO. 16-012
A RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
VICTORVILLE, CALIFORNIA, ESTABLISHING AND ADOPTING THE
VICTORVILLE OPEN DATA POLICY AND DIRECTING THE CITY
MANAGER TO ESTABLISH AND OVERSEE A DATA GOVERNANCE
WORKING GROUP FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE OPEN DATA PRACTICES OUTLINED
THEREIN
WHEREAS, the City of Victorville (“City”) creates, maintains and possesses valuable
data in support of its various business functions; and
WHEREAS, the City recognizes that this data is also a public resource and there is
signiﬁcant potential for the public to beneﬁt from innovative uses associated with making this
data freely and openly available; and
WHEREAS, the emergence and continued reﬁnement of new information technology
has dramatically changed the way citizens search for and expect to ﬁnd, consume and utilize
information, and such technology can aggregate larger quantities of data and allow government
to provide information to the public with increasing efficiency; and
WHEREAS, the City can leverage this technology to meet the public demand for
information, enhance public access to" government data and make government processes
transparent in order to promote public trust; and
WHEREAS, the City recognizes the need to appropriately safeguard against publishing
privileged, conﬁdential, private, proprietary or similar information which is exempt from
disclosure under the provisions of the California Public Records Act or any other applicable law,
rule or regulation; and
WHEREAS, balancing limitations on the disclosure of public information with the
public beneﬁt and ensuring the quality "and consistency of such data are essential to maintaining
the data’s value and utility; and
WHEREAS, the attached Victorville Open Data Policy (“Policy”), incorporates model
language and best practices and was developed in partnership with the Sunlight Foundation as
part of the scope of work outlined in the City’s Memorandum of Understanding under the What
Works Cities program; and
WHEREAS, the City Council wishes to adopt the attached Policy to formalize
Victorville’s efforts to improve the supply of data_ made available to the public in a useful and
responsive way, as well as to promote the use of such data and evidence in decision-making; and
WHEREAS, the City Council further wishes to authorize and direct the City Manager to
establish and oversee a Data Governance Working Group to develop and implement the open
data practices set forth in the attached Policy.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF VICTORVILLE
DOES HEREBY RESOLVE, DETERMINE AND ORDER AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. The recitals set forth above are true and correct and are hereby incorporated in
their entirety as part of this Resolution by this reference. ,
Section 2. The Victorville Open Data Policy set forth in Attachment A to this Resolution,
incorporated and made part of this Resolution by reference, is hereby adopted.
Section 3. The City Manager is authorized and directed to establish and oversee a Data
Governance Working Group to develop and implement the open data practices set forth in the
Policy {Attachment A).
Section 5. The City Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this Resolution.
Section 6. This Resolution shall take effect immediately upon its adoption.
 
Resolution No. 16-012
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 5th day of APRIL 2016.
MAYOR OF THE CITY OF VICTORVILLE
ATTEST:
CITY CLERK
APPROVE
CITY ATTORNEY
I, CAROLEE BATES, City Clerk of the City of Victorville and ex-officio Clerk to the City
Council of said City, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing is a true and correct copy
of Resolution No. 16-012 which was adopted at a meeting held on the 5'“ day of April
2016, by the following roll call vote, to wit:
 
AYES: Councilmembers Garcia, Cox, Kennedy, McEachron and Negrete
NOES: NONE
ABSENT: NONE
ABSTAIN: NONE
CITY CLERK 
ATTACHMENT A
VICTORVILLE OPEN DATA POLICY
Section 1. Title "
This policy, which may be amended and updated from time-to-time by City Council resolution,
shall be known as the Victorville Open Data Policy (the “Open Data Policy”).
Section 2. Deﬁnitions
a. “City Agency” or “City Agencies” shall mean the City of Victorville (“City”) and each of
the City’s (l6pﬂ1’lI_1'Il61’1llS, ofﬁces, administrative units, commissions, boards, advisory committees or other divisions of the City’s government, including the Victorville Water District, Southern California Logistics Airport Authority, RDA Successor Agency, Victorville Housing Trust, Southern California Logistics Rail Authority and Victorville Joint Powers Financing Authority.
b. “Contractor” means the third party contractors of any City Agency who create or acquire
information, records, or Data on behalf of a City Agency.
c. “Data” means statistical, factual, quantitative, or qualitative information that is
maintained or created by or on behalf of a City Agency. ,
d. “Dataset” means a named collection of related records, with the collection containing
Data organized or formatted in a speciﬁc or prescribed way, often in tabular form.
e. “Metadata” means a description of the Data ﬁelds in a Dataset that helps the public to
understand what the Data is, as well as how and when it is collected.
f. “Open Data” means Publishable Data that is available online, in an Open Format, with no
legal encumbrances on use or reuse, and is available for the public to access and download in full
without fees or a requirement of registration. Legal encumbrances include federal copyright
protections and other, non-statutory legal limitations on how or under What conditions the
Publishable Data may be used, but do not include any processes required to ensure public access
to Publishable Data or to protect the central online location/website from which Publishable Date is accessed from unlawful abuse, damage or impairment.
g. “Open Format” means any widely accepted, nonproprietary, platform-independent, machine-readable Data format, which permits automated processing of such Data and facilitates
analysis and search capabilities.
h. “Protected Information” means any Data, Dataset or portion thereof which contains
privileged, conﬁdential, private, proprietary or similar information which is exempt from
disclosure under the provisions of the California Public Records Act or any other applicable law,
rule or regulation. '
i. “Publishable Data” means Data and/or Datasets which do not consist of or contain
Protected information and have been prepared for release to the public.
Section 3. Open Data Policy Goals
a. The City commits to develop and implement practices that will allow it to achieve the
following Open Data Policy goals:
1. Proactively release all Publishable Data, making it freely available in an Open Format,
with no restrictions on use/or reuse, and fully accessible to the broadest range of users to
use for varying purposes;
2. Publish high quality, updated Publishable Data with documentation (Metadata) and
permanence to encourage maximum use;
3. Provide or support access to free, historical archives of all released City Publishable
Data;
4. Measure the effectiveness of Datasets made available through this Open Data Policy by
connecting Open Data efforts to the City’s strategic priorities;
5. Minimize limitations on the disclosure of public information, while appropriately
. safeguarding and not publishing Protected information; and
6. Support innovative uses of the City’s Publishable Data by City Agencies, Contractors,
other governmental agencies, the public and other partners such as the media, businesses,
non-proﬁts and research groups.
b. The development and implementation of these practices shall be overseen by the Data
Governance Working Group (the “DG Working Group”), consisting of both City staff and
community members. City staff members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
City Manager. Community member appointments shall be approved by the City Council. The
DG Working Group shall report to the City Manager or to his/her authorized designee.
c. This Open Data Policy shall apply to each City Agency, and to the fullest extent
permitted by applicable laws and City guidelines, its Contractors as deﬁned in Section l hereof.
d. Appropriate funding shall be established for the Open Data budget as determined by the
City Council based upon policy goals and the recommendations of the DG Working Group in the
annual report.
 
Section 4. Governance
a. Implementation of this Open Data Policy will be overseen by the DG Working Group,
who under the guidance and direction of the City Manager, shall work with each City Agency to:
 
1. Identify and publish appropriate contact information for a lead Open Data coordinator in
each City Agency who will be responsible for managing that City Agency’s participation
in this Open Data Policy;
2. Create a comprehensive inventory of Datasets held by each City Agency, which shall be
published to the central Open Data location and regularly updated;
3. Develop and implement a process for determining, in accordance with the Public Records
Act and other applicable laws, which City Agency and/or Contractor Data and/or
Datasets are appropriate for public disclosure (i.e., can be considered Publishable Data);
4. Amend current purchasing, procurement and contracting processes as needed to promote
this Open Data Policy, such as crafting guidelines to include Open Data requirements in
appropriate City contracts and creating standardized contractual provisions preserving
City ownership of Data and authorizing its publication on the City’s central Open Data
location;
5. Develop and implement a process for prioritizing the release of Publishable Datasets
which takes into account new and existing signals of interest from the public (such as the
frequency of public records requests), the City's strategic priorities, existing opportunities
for Data use in the public interest, and cost;
 
6. Develop and implement a process for proactively consulting with members of the public,
City Agency staff, Contractors, journalists and other stakeholders to identify the
Publishable Datasets which will have the greatest beneﬁt to city residents if published in
a high quality manner;
 
7. Establish processes for posting Publishable Datasets to the central Open Data location,
including processes for ensuring that such Datasets are high quality, up-to-date, are in
use-appropriate formats, and scrupulously exclude Protected Information;
 
8. Ensure that appropriate Metadata is provided for each Dataset in order to facilitate its use;
9. Develop and monitor a routinely updated, public timeline for new Dataset publication; and
10. Ensure that published Datasets are available for bulk download without legal
encumbrance.
 
b. In order to increase and improve use of the City’s Open Data, the DG Working Group
will actively encourage participation by City Agencies, Contractors and the public by providing
regular opportunities for feedback and collaboration.
 
Section 5. Central Online Location for Published Data
 
a. The City will create and maintain a publicly available location on the City's website or in
another suitable online location where the City’s Publishable Data will be available for
download.
 
b. All Publishable Data shall be placed into the public domain, in an Open Format, without
restrictions or requirements placed on use.
 
c. Each Publishable Dataset should be associated with contact information for the
appropriate manager of that Dataset, as well as with Metadata.
 
Section 6. Open Data Report and Review
a. Within one year of the effective date of this Open Data Policy, and thereafter no later
than March 1st of each successive year, the DG Working Group shall publish an annual Open
Data report. The report shall include an assessment of progress towards achievement of the goals
of this Open Data Policy, an assessment of how the City’s Open Data work has furthered or will
further the City’s strategic priorities and a description and publication timeline for Publishable
Datasets envisioned to be released by the City in the following year.
b. As part of the annual review, the DG Working Group will make funding
recommendations for the upcoming ﬁscal year, as well as suggestions for improving the City’s
Open Data management processes to ensure that the City continues to move towards the
achievement of Open Data Policy goals.
 
Section 7. Effective Date.
This Open Data Policy shall become effective as of the date it is adopted by resolution of the
City Council.
