<!-- Chattanooga, TN 2014 -->
<!-- Open Data Policies for Sunlight Foundation -->
<!-- StateDecoded XML Examples
http://docs.statedecoded.com/xml-format.html-->

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<law>
    <structure>
        <unit label="section" identifier="chattanoogatn2014" level="1"></unit>
    </structure>
    <section_number>"chattanoogatn2014</section_number> <!--citystateyear, no spaces-->
    <catch_line>Chattanooga, TN (2014)</catch_line>
    <text>
<!--insert text of the policy below this line  -->

City of Chattanooga Open Data Policy
EXECUTIVE ORDER OF THE MAYOR No. 2014-04
City of Chattanooga Open Data Policy
WHEREAS, the City of Chattanooga (the "City") is committed to improving the community by fostering open, transparent, valuable, effective, accountable, and accessible government functions; and,
WHEREAS, by removing barriers to data, the City of Chattanooga seeks to develop opportunities for civic engagement, economic development, commerce, and increased investment; and,
WHEREAS, the City of Chattanooga commits to working to enable data captured and used by the City to be more easily accessible by people and advanced technologies and applications ("Machines"), while at the same time protecting the privacy rights and personal safety of others; and,
WHEREAS, the adoption of open standards improves transparency of government functions, access to public information, and improved coordination and efficiencies among organizations across the public, non-profit, and private sectors; and,
WHEREAS, the City of Chattanooga commits to strive for a future in which important government data and information will be open data by default.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, Andy Berke, Mayor of the City of Chattanooga, Tennessee, by virtue of the executive and administrative authority vested in me by the Charter of the City of Chattanooga and the statutes and laws of the state of Tennessee, do hereby direct and order as follows:
1. City of Chattanooga data portal
a. A single web portal shall be (i) established and maintained by or on behalf of the City; and (ii) located at data.chattanooga.gov or its successor website.
b. Any data set made accessible on the City of Chattanooga data portal shall use a machine readable format whose specification is publicly and freely available and which places no restrictions monetary or otherwise upon its use.
2. Data set availability
a. Each City agency or department ("Agency") shall identify and publish priority existing datasets, maintained within the department, to the City's data portal. Priority shall be given to data that has been frequently requested by members of the public through existing mechanisms such as the Tennessee Open Records Act.
b. Agencies shall treat newly created datasets as open by default and publish said datasets to the City's open data portal, except data that the Office of the City Attorney determines to be confidential, privileged or otherwise protected by law.
3. Open data governance group
a. An Open Data Advisory Group shall be chaired by the Chief Information Officer, or the designee of the Chief Information Officer, and include open data coordinators from each city agency.
b. The Open Data Advisory Group shall assist the Department of Information Technology in the creation of the annual open data compliance report required under paragraph 6.
4. Open data coordinator
a. The head of each Agency shall designate from within the City agency an open data coordinator, who shall (i) assist the Agency in implementing its duties under this Order; (ii) serve on the Open Data Advisory Group; (iii) upon request, meet with the Open Data Advisory Group to discuss any matter pertaining to implementation of this Order; and (iv) assist the Department of Information Technology in the preparation of the annual open data compliance report required under paragraph 6 of this Order.
5. Data inventory
a. Within 90 days of the effective date of this Order, a complete inventory of existing data within all Agencies shall be cataloged in a public manner, and will clearly articulate (i) if the data is available in a digital form; (ii) if the data is Machine readable; (iii) the Agency that is responsible for the data; (iv) if the data and metadata are clearly documented; and (v) if the data is available on the open data portal, and if not, reason(s) why.
b. The data inventory shall be regularly updated and available on the City's open data portal.
6. Annual open data compliance report
a. Within 360 days of the effective date of this Order, and no later than July 15 of each year thereafter, the chair of the Open Data Advisory Group shall submit to the Mayor an annual open data compliance report prepared with the assistance of the Open Data Advisory Group.
b. Such annual report shall (i) establish, on an Agency specific basis, reasonable timelines, implementation plans and review processes to promote, over time and in steadily graduated fashion, increased online public access to city agency data sets except those that are confidential, privileged or otherwise protected by law; and (ii) summarize and comment on the state of open data and data set availability in the Agencies.
c. The report shall be made available on the City data portal.
7. Technology-related procurements
a. The Chief Information Officer shall work to develop contract guidelines to promote open data policies in technology-related procurements. These guidelines shall promote the City’s open data policies, including, where appropriate, requirements to post data on the City's open data portal or to make data available through other means.
Section 8. Open data terms of use
a. The Department of Information Technology will help with the acquisition of a license that conforms to the principles set forth in the Open Knowledge Definition, under which to publish the data and make the license clearly known on the City's data portal.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have executed this Executive Order No. 2014-04 this the 31st day of May, 2014.


Tulsa Resolution 2013

See government hosted document here.
A RESOLUTION SUPPORTING OPEN AND ACCESSIBLE DATA, OPEN STANDARDS, AND OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE.
WHEREAS, the City of Tulsa is committed to bringing the community into City Hall by engaging citizens and soliciting their ideas, input, and creative energy;
WHEREAS, municipalities throughout the world have an opportunity to dramatically lower their costs by collectively sharing and supporting software they use and create;
WHEREAS, the City of Tulsa is committed to using technology to foster open, transparent, and accessible government;
WHEREAS, by sharing data freely, the City of Tulsa seeks to develop opportunities for economic development, commerce, increased investment, and civic engagement for Citizens of Tulsa;
WHEREAS, the total value of public data is maximized when provided at a minimal cost of distribution;
WHEREAS, the City of Tulsa should look for opportunities to create economic activity and partner with the creative tech sector;
WHEREAS, the adoption of open standards improves transparency, access to city information by citizens and businesses, and coordination and efficiencies across municipal, state, and federal boundaries;
WHEREAS, digital innovation can enhance citizen communications, support the brand of the city as creative and innovative, improve service delivery, support citizens to self organize and solve their own problems, and create a stronger sense of civic engagement, community, and pride;
WHEREAS, the City of Tulsa has significant resources of data and information;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT THE CITY OF TULSA ENDORSES
THE PRINCIPLES OF: GTB 4/5/13 2
Open and Accessible Data – the City of Tulsa shall establish the goal to continually work toward an increased range and volume of data it shares with citizens, businesses, and other jurisdictions the greatest amount possible while respecting privacy and security concerns as identified by the City Attorney;
Open Standards – the City of Tulsa shall establish the goal to analyze and adopt prevailing open standards for data, document, maps, and other formats of media;
Open Source Software – the City of Tulsa, when replacing existing software or considering new applications, will place open source software on an equal footing with commercial systems during procurement cycles; and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED THAT IN PURSUIT OF OPEN DATA THE CITY OF TULSA WILL:
Identify potential opportunities to share select data;
Adopt an open source policy;
Adopt an open source approval process
Promote prevailing open standard formats for data;
Explore licensing opportunities for software applications developed by the City of Tulsa such that they may be used by other municipalities, businesses and/or the public.
Establish a committee of City employees and local volunteers to aide in the achievement of the above goals.
Tulsa Executive Order 2015-07 See government hosted document here.

OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
TULSA, OKLAHOMA
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. _2015-07_

PROVIDING FOR AN OPEN DATA PROGRAM TO PROMOTE PUBLIC AVAILABILITY, ACCESSIBILITY AND GOVERNMENT TRANSPARENCY; CREATING AN OPEN DATA ADVISORY BOARD;

WHEREAS, Resolution 7991 was adopted in May 2013, by the City of Tulsa (“City”) supporting open and accessible Data, Open Standards and Open Source Software; and

WHEREAS, the adoption of a comprehensive open data program comprised of formal policies and procedures for making Data open will build upon the above-named Resolution and assist in achieving the City’s Open Data goals; and
WHEREAS, the City of Tulsa is committed to creating a high level of openness and transparency in government; and
WHEREAS, the City of Tulsa is committed to providing open records and public information, inclusive of Data, as hereinafter defined and consistent with the requirements of the Oklahoma Open Records Act, which is essential to open and effective government; and
WHEREAS, it is desirable that more Datasets, as hereinafter defined, should be created, published and made available by the City of Tulsa via its Open Data Portal, providing open access to certain compilations of public information; and
WHEREAS, the City of Tulsa seeks to empower the citizens of Tulsa to participate in its municipal government by providing easy and open access to public records and information consistent with Oklahoma Open Records Act; and

NOW THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as the Mayor of the City of Tulsa, it is hereby ordered that:

Section 1.    Purpose – The purpose of this Executive Order, in part, is to define Open Data, establish an Open Data Advisory Board (“ODAB”) tasked with creating an overall Open Data program, formulating and incorporating an Open Data Implementation Plan which establishes formal Open Data Policies and mechanisms for implementing Open Data action items.

Section 2.     Definitions – As used in this Executive Order, the terms below shall have the following definitions:

(A) “Data” means and is limited to final versions of statistical or factual,        quantitative, or qualitative information that: (1) is in alphanumeric form reflected in a list, table, graph, chart or other non-narrative form, that can be digitally transmitted or processed; and (2) is regularly received, created or maintained by or for a City department, office, administrative unit, commission, board, advisory committee or other subdivision of City government within the official jurisdiction of the Executive Branch; (3) records a measurement, transaction or determination related to the business of the City and mission of such City subdivision; and (4) is inclusive of software source code developed or maintained by or on behalf of the City of Tulsa.  The term “data” shall not include information provided by other governmental entities or image files, such as designs, drawings, photos or scanned copies of original documents; provided, however, that the term “data” does include statistical or factual information about image files and geographic information system (GIS) data.  

(B) “Dataset” means a named collection of related data, the aggregation of which contains data organized or formatted in a specific or prescribed way, often in tabular form.  Any Open Data made accessible as a Dataset on the City Open Data Portal shall:  (1) use a format that permits automated processing of such data; (2) use appropriate technology to notify the public of updates to the data; and (3) be accessible to external search capabilities.

(C) “Open Format” means any widely accepted, nonproprietary, platform-independent, or machine-readable method for formatting data, which permits automated processing of such data and is accessible to external search capabilities.

(D) “Protected information” means any information to which the City or any department thereof may deny access as exempt from production or disclosure pursuant to the Oklahoma Open Records Act or any other law, rule or regulation.

(E) “Sensitive information” means any Data or portion of a Dataset, which, if published on the Open Data Portal, could raise privacy, confidentiality or security concerns or have the potential to jeopardize public health, safety or welfare to an extent that is greater than the potential public benefit of publishing that information.

(F) “Open Data” means any Data, which does not contain protected information or sensitive information and which is made available online in Open Format, with no legal encumbrances on use or reuse. This definition is inclusive of any software source code made available online (“open source software”).  However, Open Data is not information that is treated as exempt from production or public disclosure under the Open Records Act or other Oklahoma law.

(G) “Open Data Portal” means the “Open Tulsa” internet site, which is currently established and maintained by or on behalf of the City, located at https://www.cityoftulsa.org/our-city/open-tulsa/about-open-tulsa.aspx or its successor website.  The purpose of the Open Data Portal is to create public and open access to Datasets which have specifically been prepared for release as Open Data..

Section 3.  Open Data Portal – The City has previously established an Open Data Portal, as defined herein above, where the City’s Datasets will be publicly available online. The Open Data Portal shall serve as the authoritative source for Open Data provided by the City and will continue to be maintained and administered by the IT Department under the direction of the City’s Chief Information Officer (CIO) or his or her designee. 

Section 4.     Open Data Advisory Board

There is hereby established an Open Data Advisory Board (“ODAB”), which shall be chaired by the CIO. The IT Department and Maximizing and Advancing Performance (MAPP) Office will work with the head of City Departments to identify a Data Coordinator in each Department.  Data Coordinators will serve as members of the ODAB.  The ODAB shall have advisory authority over all matters pertaining to the Open Data Portal and shall establish timetables for development and implementation of the overall Open Data program to enhance and develop transparency, and public participation, and collaboration in City activities.

For purposes of identifying Datasets for inclusion on the City of Tulsa Open Data Portal, the ODAB will consult with the City department, office, administrative unit, commission, board, advisory committee or other unit of City government within the official jurisdiction of the Executive Branch that maintains any Data proposed to be included in a Dataset and will consider whether the information embodied in the proposed Dataset:  (1) is reliable and accurate;   (2) is frequently the subject of a written request for public records of the type that a public body is required to make available for inspection or copying under the Open Records Act;  (3) increases the City’s accountability, efficiency, responsiveness or delivery of services; (4) improves public knowledge of the City and its operations; and  (5) creates economic opportunity.

Each City department, office, administrative unit, commission, board, advisory committee or other unit of City government within the official jurisdiction of the Executive Branch shall make reasonable and appropriate efforts to update the Data included in any Dataset on a regular basis.

The ODAB will establish a more detailed Open Data Implementation Plan that will include additional Open Data Policies, Procedures and Guidelines to be approved by the Mayor.  The ODAB will be responsible for an annual Open Data report to the Mayor which advises on the progress made in the previous year and the resources needed for the immediately preceding fiscal year along with future years as information is available.

Section 5.   Reservations and disclaimers 
Open Data available on the City’s Open Data Portal shall be provided as a public service, on an “as is” basis, and for informational purposes only.  Although the City will strive to ensure that such public data are accurate, the City makes no warranty, representation or guaranty of any type as to the content, accuracy, timeliness, completeness or fitness for any particular purpose or use of any public data provided on such portal; nor shall any such warranty be implied.  The City assumes no liability for (1) any errors, omissions or inaccuracies in the public data provided on the Open Data Portal regardless of how caused; or (2) any decision made or action taken or not taken by anyone using or relying upon such public data; or (3) any virus or other damage to any computer that might occur during or as a result of accessing such portal or the public data provided therein. 

The City reserves the right to discontinue availability of content on its Open Data Portal at any time and for any reason.  If a Dataset accessible on the Open Data Portal and the City, by or through whatever means, is notified or otherwise learns that any Dataset or portion thereof posted on the Open Data Portal is factually inaccurate, misleading, or contains protected information or sensitive information the City will, as appropriate, promptly correct or remove, or cause to be corrected or removed, such Data from the Open Data Portal.

(C) Nothing in this Order shall be construed to create a private right of action to enforce any provision of this Order.  Failure to comply with any provision of this Order shall not result in any liability to the City of Tulsa, a municipal corporation. 


Dated this 	21	day of 	Dec	, 2015.

						

												
					Mayor Pro-Tem

ATTEST:


						
City Clerk

APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY:



						
City Attorney


<history>
    <!-- put Notes/resolution/executive order/refernces history in this area. (Adopted on, council votes, date passed etc) --> 

Enacted: 2014
Link: https://github.com/cityofchattanooga/Chattanooga-Open-Data-Policy/blob/master/Open%20Data%20Policy.md
Means: Executive Order


</history>
    <!--<metadata></metadata>-->
    <tags>
        <!-- Tag if this juristiction is a city state, etc --> 
        <tag>city</tag>
        <!-- <tag>state</tag> --> 
        <!-- <tag>county</tag> -->
        <!-- <tag>executive order</tag> --> 
        
    </tags>
    </text>
</law>
