
Cincinnati, OH 
Administrative Regulation_No. 61
City of Cincinnati Date: May 29, 2014
Office ofthe City Manager
Approved: _____________
OPEN DATA REQUIREMENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
OBJECTIVE
The City of Cincinnati recognizes that citizens’ access to their local government’s information is fundamental to transparency and accountability. Therefore, the City of Cincinnati will make datasets about the operations and finances of government publicly available for review, interpretation, analysis, research and criticism.
DIRECTIVE
City departments will work in cooperation with the Department of Enterprise Technology Solutions as outlined in this Administration Regulation and its corresponding Open Data Implementation Plan (“implementation plan”) to make their respective datasets publicly available via OpenDataCincy.org.
The datasets will adhere to the following principles:
1. Complete: All facets of the data are available (unless subject to valid privacy, security or privilege limitations).
2. Accessible: Data is easily and freely accessed via a central web portal, OpenDataCincy.org.
3. Primary: Data is collected at the source, with the highest level of granularity (not in aggregate or modified forms).
4. Timely: Data is available to the public in a timely manner, ideally as soon as it is collected (“real-time” data).
5. Machine-Processable: Data is reasonably structured, based on industry data standards, to allow for automated processing.
6. License-Free: Data must not be subject to copyright, patent or trademark or trade secret regulation.
7. Non-Proprietary: Data must be available in a format over which no entity has exclusive control.
OVERSIGHT & IMPLEMENTATION STRUCTURE
Executive Committee
The Open Data Executive Committee (“Executive Committee”) will consist of:
1. a Chief Data Officer;
2. an information technology manager from the Department of Enterprise Technology Solutions;
3. an attorney from the Solicitor’s Office;
4. a non-technical representative from the City Manager’s Office; and
5. an analytics expert from the Department of Enterprise Technology Solutions.
The Executive Committee will meet quarterly, or more often as is determined necessary by the Chief Data Officer.
At least once annually, the Executive Committee shall have an open meeting at which members of the public may attend and directly provide the Executive Committee with input.
The Executive Committee will be responsible for vetting data specific to security or privacy concerns;
reviewing funding requests from the Chief Data Officer and making recommendations for funding to the
Director of Enterprise Technology Solutions; and for holding the Chief Data Officer accountable to the implementation plan.
The Executive Committee will also be responsible for conducting an annual review (or more often, as the Chief Data Officer recommends as necessary) of this Administration Regulation and making recommendations for revision to the City Manager, with the goal of expanding the City’s open data initiative and increasing the number of open datasets.
Chief Data Officer
The Chief Data Officer will be identified from existing staff of the Department of Enterprise Technology Solutions.
The Chief Data Officer will be responsible for realizing the implementation plan as laid out in this Administrative Regulation by providing technical assistance and guidance to the Open Data Working Group, and by identifying infrastructure and resources needed to realize the implementation plan.
The Chief Data Officer will establish standards and schedules for the publication of datasets. The overarching goal is to deliver public datasets in an efficient and cost-effective manner.
The Chief Data Officer will review existing City policies to identify impediments to the City’s open data initiative. The Chief Data Officer will work with relevant staff, including but not limited to the City’s Information Security Officer and the Solicitor’s Office, to guide and/or propose revisions to existing policies in order to facilitate the City’s open data initiative, where greater openness can be promoted without damage to the City’s legal and financial interests.
The Chief Data Officer will facilitate information sharing amongst City departments. Additionally, the Chief Data Officer will hold quarterly sessions, which will be open to the general public, in order to facilitate better cooperation between the City and Cincinnati’s private technology development community. The purpose of these sessions will be to solicit feedback on desired datasets not yet published in open format, and to gain a greater understanding of private-sector needs and recommendations.
The Chief Data Officer will be responsible for making recommendations to the Executive Committee for revision to this Administrative Regulation and its implementation plan with the goal of expanding the City’s open data initiative and increasing the number of open datasets. These recommendations will be submitted, at a minimum, on an annual basis.
The Chief Data Officer will also act as a liaison between the Open Data Working Group and the Executive Committee; provide department-by-department summary updates on a monthly basis to the Executive Committee and City Manager; provide a comprehensive annual review of the City’s open data initiative for the Executive Committee and City Manager; prepare any ad hoc reports as requested by the Mayor or City Council;
make funding recommendations to the Executive Committee; and set the agenda for the executive committee’s meetings.
The Chief Data Officer may require the Executive Committee to meet more frequently than each quarter, as the Chief Data Officer determines is necessary.
Open Data Working Group
The Open Data Working Group (“Working Group”) will consist of, at a minimum, one Open Data Coordinator from each of the City’s departments. Additional members may be added at the discretion of the Chief Data Officer.
The Working Group will meet quarterly, no less than one week prior to the quarterly meetings of the Executive Committee.
The Working Group will serve as a forum in support of the implementation plan. The Working Group will work to support the City’s open government goals, including collaborations with researchers, the private sector and the public. The Working Group will also identify problems or issues that arise during the course of their work on the implementation plan and develop recommendations for resolution to the Chief Data Officer.
Open Data Coordinators
Each Department will have at least one Open Data Coordinator. The Open Data Coordinator may have other job duties in addition to serving in this capacity.
Department Directors or Division Heads may make recommendations to the Chief Data Officer on their respective departmental Open Data Coordinators; however, the Chief Data Officer will have sole discretion to select the most capable and appropriate departmental representatives to serve in that capacity.
The Open Data Coordinators, in cooperation with their Department Director, will identify and recommend datasets for public distribution to the Chief Data Officer.
With assistance and direction from the Chief Data Officer, the Open Data Coordinators will work to realize the implementation plan.
Each Department’s Open Data Coordinator also will be responsible for attending quarterly meetings of the Open Data Working Group; identifying to the Chief Data Officer any potential privacy or security concerns in a dataset; and informing their Department Director of their work related to the implementation plan.
PUBLIC RECORDS & LEGALLY PROTECTED INFORMATION
Nothing in this Administrative Regulation shall be construed to supersede existing requirements for review and clearance of information exempt from disclosure under the Ohio Public Records Act and other applicable laws, regulations, or judicial orders.

OPEN DATA IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
This Open Data Implementation Plan takes effect upon the City Manager’s signing of the corresponding Administrative Regulation.
Timeframe Action
Within 30 days • ETS Director identifies Chief Data Officer and_members_of Executive_Committee
Within 60 days • Chief Data Officer selects departmental Open Data Coordinators
. Chief Data Officer provides first summary update_to_Executive_Committee
Within 90 days 
• Joint meeting of ETS Director, Executive Committee and Open Data Working Group
Departments work with Chief Data Officer to identify one dataset to publish in accordance with the open data principles outlined in the Directive of the Administrative Regulation
• Chief Data Officer hosts open session to
engage private citizens and solicit feedback
• Chief Data Officer provides second
summary_update_to_Executive_Committee
Within 120 days 
Chief Data Officer provides third summary update_to_Executive_Committee
Within 150 days 
• Chief Data Officer has identified necessary resources and infrastructure to publish one dataset per department in accordance with the open data principles outlined in the Directive of the Administrative Regulation
• Chief Data Officer provides fourth summary_update_to_Executive_Committee
Within 180 days 
• Chief Data Officer hosts open session to
engage private citizens and solicit feedback
• Chief Data Officer provides fifth summary update to Executive Committee
• Meeting of the Open Data Working Group
• Meeting of Executive Committee
Within 210 days 
• Chief Data Officer has secured necessary
resources and infrastructure to publish one dataset per department in accordance with
the open data principles outlined in the Directive of the Administrative Regulation
• Chief Data Officer provides sixth summary update to Executive Committee
Within 240 days • Chief Data Officer provides seventh summary update_to_Executive_Committee
Timeframe Action
Within 270 days 
• One dataset as identified above is published in accordance with the principles outlined in the Directive of the Administrative Regulation
• Meeting of the Open Data Working Group
• Meeting of Executive Committee
• Chief Data Officer hosts open session to
engage private citizens and solicit feedback
Within 300 days 
• Chief Data Officer prepares Phase 1 Progress Report on activities of Open Data Working Group and makes recommendations for updates or revisions to the Administrative Regulation, ongoing funding and support needs, implementation plan
Within 4 years 
• All City datasets publicly available online in open format
